The Project Gutenberg EBook of Lassen Trails, by Stephen Halsey Matteson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Lassen Trails

Author: Stephen Halsey Matteson

Illustrator: Dorothy M. Matteson

Release Date: October 24, 2017 [EBook #55799]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LASSEN TRAILS ***




Produced by Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                             LASSEN TRAILS


                                   By
                          STEPHEN H. MATTESON
                       Former Seasonal Naturalist

                   Illustrations by Dorothy Matteson

     _A brief guide to the Trails of Lassen Volcanic National Park_

    [Illustration: National Park Service]

                             Copyright 1963
                       Loomis Museum Association
                          Third Printing 1970
                    Produced in cooperation with the
                         National Park Service




                           TABLE OF CONTENTS


                                                                     Page
  Preface                                                               3
  Introduction                                                          4
  Using the Trails: A Few Tips for Beginners                            5
  The Trails:
  1. Forest Lake and Brokeoff Mountain                                 10
  2. Mill Creek Falls                                                  12
  3. Ridge Lakes                                                       13
  4. Sulphur Works Hot Springs                                         14
  5. Bumpass Hell                                                      16
  6. Bumpass Hell to Cold Boiling Lake and Kings Creek Campground      18
  7. Lassen Peak                                                       20
  8. Terrace, Shadow, and Cliff Lakes                                  22
  9. Park Road to Summit Lake                                          23
  10. Park Road to Hat Lake                                            24
  11. Cold Boiling and Crumbaugh Lakes, Conard Meadows, Mill Creek
          Falls, and Sulphur Works Campground                          25
  12. Kings Creek Falls                                                26
  13. Summit Lake to Echo and Twin Lakes                               27
  14. Summit Lake to Horseshoe Lake via Upper Twin Lake                30
  15. Summit Lake to Horseshoe Lake via Grassy Swale Creek             32
  16. Cluster Lakes                                                    33
  17. Paradise Meadows                                                 34
  18. Chaos Crags and Crags Lake                                       36
  19. Lily Pond                                                        37
  20. Manzanita Lake                                                   38
  21. Manzanita Creek                                                  39
  22. Cinder Cone                                                      40
  23. Prospect Peak                                                    42
  24. Bathtub Lake                                                     43
  25. Butte Lake (North and East Shores)                               44
  26. Widow Lake                                                       45
  27. Butte Lake to Snag Lake                                          46
  28. Horseshoe Lake to Snag Lake                                      47
  29. Juniper Lake to Snag Lake                                        48
  30. Inspiration Point                                                50
  31. Crystal Lake                                                     51
  32. Mount Harkness                                                   52
  33. Boiling Springs Lake                                             54
  34. Devil's Kitchen                                                  55
  Map of Lassen Volcanic National Park                              28-29




                                PREFACE


Since most of Lassen Volcanic National Park can best be seen and enjoyed
by walking the trails, this booklet is written to help those who wish to
know more about the park. Much can be observed from the Lassen Park
Road, including some of the best scenery and most interesting geology,
but to become thoroughly acquainted with the park and to appreciate
fully what it has to offer, there is no better way than walking the
trails.

Thirty-four trails are briefly described in this booklet. Rather than
give a complete description of each trail, an attempt is made to
indicate the highlights of each, giving enough information so that a
hiker can decide which trails will interest him most.

The author would like to express his thanks and appreciation to a number
of persons who have helped to make this publication possible: To Raymond
L. Nelson, former Chief Park Naturalist, for guidance and sketch maps;
Lester D. Bodine, former Chief Park Ranger; Harold L. Stanley, Robert
Ball, and H. Trickey Lewis, seasonal rangers, for their aid and
information; and to Dorothy Matteson, art department of Chico State
College for the excellent illustrations.




                              INTRODUCTION


Lassen Volcanic National Park, established on August 9, 1916, and
containing more than 160 square miles, is administered by the National
Park Service, U. S. Department of the Interior.

The National Park System, of which this park is a unit, is dedicated to
conserving the scenic, scientific, and historic heritage of the United
States for the benefit and enjoyment of its people.

Created in 1849, the Department of the Interior--America's Department of
Natural Resources--is concerned with the management, conservation, and
development of the Nation's water, wildlife, mineral, forest, and park
and recreation resources. It also has major responsibilities for Indian
and Territorial affairs.

As the Nation's principal conservation agency, the Department works to
assure that nonrenewable resources are developed and used wisely, that
park and recreational resources are conserved for the future, and that
renewable resources make their full contribution to the progress,
prosperity, and security of the United States--now and in the future.




               USING THE TRAILS: A FEW TIPS FOR BEGINNERS


1. STAY ON THE TRAIL. This is usually a simple matter, but in a few
places animal trails obscure the main trail. On some trails orange
markers are nailed to trees to guide the hiker, and, on others, rock
cairns mark the way.

2. AVOID SHORT CUTS. In the long run, they are not short cuts, as they
use up more energy and are more tiring than the somewhat longer trail.
They are often dangerous to the person using them and, also, dislodged
rocks may injure hikers below. In addition, they always damage the trail
by filling it with debris and by accelerating erosion.

3. KEEP YOUR BEARINGS. In Lassen Volcanic there are plenty of landmarks,
so this should not be difficult. A good map will help, and topographic
maps of Lassen are available. If you are going to return via the same
trail and have any doubts about remaining on it, use the Indian method
of looking back frequently.

4. BE CAREFUL WITH FIRE. A campfire should be soaked and the ashes
thoroughly mixed with water until every ember is out. To build a
campfire anywhere except at a regular campground you must secure a
special permit from a Park Ranger. Do not smoke while hiking on the
trails. When you want a smoke, sit down, break your match before
throwing it away and completely extinguish the butt before leaving.

5. KEEP TOGETHER. It is the person who is separated from the rest who
gets lost.

6. CONSERVE YOUR STRENGTH. The elevations in Lassen Volcanic are
considerably higher than most people are used to, and you may tire more
easily. If you start out at a pace which seems slow you are more likely
to finish than if you hurry. Rest often.

7. CARRY A LIGHT AND COMFORTABLE PACK.

8. CARRY YOUR OWN WATER unless you know the area. The water in the
streams should be pure, but the National Park Service cannot guarantee
it against human pollution. Snow may be used, but only a little at a
time, in order to prevent cramps.

9. KEEP THE TRAILS FREE FROM LITTER. The beauty of clean, wild places is
so fragile even a bit of paper dropped can mar it.

10. WEAR PROPER CLOTHING--hiking boots for extensive or rugged hikes,
and light but warm clothing. A light jacket is recommended, as hot
summer days often cool quickly.

11. PLAN YOUR HIKE. By careful utilization of your time you will be able
to see more and have a more enjoyable trip. Allow plenty of time.
Usually it is more satisfying to thoroughly explore a few sections than
to hurriedly try to see everything.

12. CONSIDER comfort items such as, bandaids, mosquito repellant, sun
glasses, suntan lotion.

    [Illustration: Mountain Hemlock Cones]




                               THE TRAILS


No attempt is made to give a complete description of any trail, but
instead to give sufficient information to enable a prospective user to
know if he is likely to find a particular one interesting. Before the
description of each trail, the following items are given: Starting
point, distance, topography, time, and features. Many starting points
are at guide marker numbers which are referred to in the _Road Guide to
Lassen Volcanic National Park_. "Topography" refers to the vertical rise
or fall. For example a "descent of 500 feet" means a drop in elevation
of 500 feet. As "Time" varies considerably among different persons; an
attempt is made to indicate the time needed for a leisurely hike. A
young person in good condition will require less time than indicated,
while a bird watcher, photographer, or naturalist might take much
longer.

It is hoped that with these items indicated, as well as a description of
the more interesting features of each trail, you will be able to decide
which trails will offer the greatest satisfaction and enjoyment.

Opening of the trails in the park varies from year to year according to
the amount of snow during the previous winter. During July, August and
September most of the trails are open.

The following tables of opening dates are for years of average snowfall,
and the actual dates will vary from two weeks earlier to two weeks later
than indicated. Trails at lower elevations and on open slopes facing
south will be available as much as a month earlier than higher trails on
north slopes, or trails through heavy forest. Trail crews attempt to
open some trails early, especially the Lassen Peak and Bumpass Hell
trails. Even though snow has melted, down trees may prevent easy hiking
until trail crews can find time to work the trails.

  MAY 15
    Lily Pond
    Manzanita Lake
    Sulphur Works
  JUNE 1
    Bathtub Lake
    Butte Lake
    Cinder Cone
  JUNE 15
    Boiling Springs Lake
    Chaos Crags and Crags Lake
    Cluster Lakes
    Devil's Kitchen Lake
    Mill Creek Falls
    Paradise Meadow
    Summit Lake to Echo and Twin Lakes
    Summit Lake to Horseshoe Lake via Upper Twin Lake
    Summit Lake to Horseshoe Lake via Grassy Swale Creek
    Widow Lake
  JULY 1
    Bumpass Hell
    Butte Lake to Snag Lake
    Cold Boiling and Crumbaugh Lakes
    Crystal Lake
    Forest Lake
    Horseshoe Lake to Snag Lake
    Inspiration Point
    Juniper Lake to Snag Lake
    Kings Creek Falls
    Lassen Peak
    Manzanita Creek
    Mount Harkness
    Park Road to Summit Lake
    Park Road to Hat Lake
    Prospect Peak
    Ridge Lakes
    Terrace, Shadow, and Cliff Lakes
  JULY 15
    Brokeoff Mountain

    [Illustration: MAP SYMBOLS]

  TRAILS
  ROADS
  PARKING AREAS
  BUILDINGS
  CAMPGROUNDS
  STREAMS
  WATERFALLS
  MOUNTAINS
  LAKES
  THERMAL ACTIVITY
  NORTH DIRECTION


1. FOREST LAKE AND BROKEOFF MOUNTAIN

  Starting Point:  Guide Marker 2
  Distances:       Forest Lake, 1.5 miles; Brokeoff Mountain, 3.7
                   miles. Total round trip 7.4 miles
  Topography:      Uphill--Forest Lake, 700 feet; Brokeoff Mountain,
                   2600 feet
  Time:            Forest Lake, 2-1/2 hours; Brokeoff Mountain, 5 hours
  Features:        Scenic views, flowers, streams

    [Illustration: Trail map]

For sheer beauty and rugged mountain scenery the Brokeoff trail is one
of the best in Lassen. From the entrance station it climbs steadily
through open meadows and forest for two miles and then through the
scattered hemlocks and finally above timberline to the top. Forest Lake
is near the trail, and is a good objective for a leisurely nature walk.
A wide variety of wildflowers will be found changing with the seasons,
and the Brewer mountainheath produces an outstanding display. Birds
frequently seen include juncos, chickadees, western tanagers,
flycatchers, and a number of others. Deer are common.

Beyond Forest Lake the forest becomes more open. At the west end of the
mountain just before the last half mile of climb, there is a good view
of Mt. Shasta. From the top of the mountain there are good views of
Lassen Peak, Conard, Chaos Crags, Diller, Shasta, and other mountains of
the vicinity. Also, the view of the old Tehama caldera is excellent from
this point.

Pikas are sometimes seen among the rocks near the top, and marmots among
the rocks at lower elevations.

Snow is likely to be found in places along the trail until about
mid-August, and there is usually too much snow for climbing before
mid-July.

    [Illustration: Mountain Chickadee]


2. MILL CREEK FALLS

  Starting Point:  Sulphur Works Campground
  Distances:       2.3 miles, round trip 4.6 miles
  Topography:      Downhill about 300 feet and uphill about the same
  Time:            2-1/2 hours
  Features:        Waterfall, forest, flowers

    [Illustration: Trail map]

Mill Creek Falls is the highest waterfall in the park with a drop of 75
feet. It is at the junction of East Sulphur and Bumpass creeks. Because
of the surrounding forest and rugged terrain there are only two or three
points from which it can be photographed.

The trail descends to the crossing of West Sulphur Creek, crosses an
open hillside and follows through forested areas to the falls. Deer are
likely to be seen as well as a variety of birds. Mule-ears, also called
wyethia, is the common wildflower that covers the open hillsides. Many
other wildflowers, including the blue and white stickseed, can be seen.
There are good views of Brokeoff Mountain and Mount Diller.

There are no fish in the streams near the falls nor for some distance
below as there is too much sulphur from the thermal areas above. Farther
down, the water is diluted sufficiently for fish to live.

The trail continues beyond the crossing of East Sulphur and Bumpass
creeks to Kings Creek Campground. (See Cold Boiling and Crumbaugh Lakes
Trail.)


3. RIDGE LAKES

  Starting Point:  Sulphur Works parking area
  Distances:       1.1 miles, round trip 2.2 miles
  Topography:      Rather steep climb of 1,000 feet
  Time:            2 hours
  Features:        Lakes, flowers, scenic views, wildlife, forests

    [Illustration: Trail map]

These small lakes are in a cirque below the rim of the old Mount Tehama
caldera. From them excellent views of Mount Diller and Diamond Peak can
be seen. You will find good subjects for pictures, and naturalists will
find a variety of flowers (including the striking leopard lily), birds,
trees, and probably deer.

The trail follows the ridge directly above the parking area for about a
half mile, going through red fir and white pine forests. It then crosses
an open hillside and finally goes over the moraine below the lakes. When
the water is high the two lakes are joined into one. Above the lakes
game trails go up the side of the Tehama rim, which is steep and covered
with loose rock. Only experienced hikers should continue, and never
alone.


4. SULPHUR WORKS

  Starting Point:  East end of the parking area
  Distances:       0.3 mile, round trip
  Topography:      A few steep places
  Time:            25 minutes
  Features:        Hydrothermal activity

    [Illustration: Trail map]

The name "Sulphur Works" was given to this area when two men, Boarman
and Supan, tried unsuccessfully to develop the sulphur and clay
properties in 1865. The hydrothermal activity consists of hot springs,
mud pots, and fumaroles. As a result of the hydrothermal activity a
number of different minerals are deposited in the area giving it pastel
shades of yellow, orange, green, and red. Some of the minerals found are
powdery opal, chalcedony, hematite, pyrite, kaolinite, alunite, and
sulphur.

It is believed that this is part of the vent system of the ancient
volcano, Mount Tehama, which collapsed thousands of years ago. Signs
posted along the trail explain the various features. This is the only
hydrothermal area close to the park road.

As crusts may be thin with boiling water underneath, visitors are warned
to stay on the trail.

    [Illustration: Bumpass Hell]


5. BUMPASS HELL

  Starting Point:  Parking area by Guide Marker 17
  Distances:       Round trip to view point, 2.2 miles; round trip over
                   entire nature trail, 3.0 miles
  Topography:      A gradual climb of 500 feet in the first mile, and a
                   descent of 250 feet into the thermal area
  Time:            2 hours to view point and return, 3 hours for
                   complete round trip
  Features:        Hydrothermal activity, glacial evidence, scenic
                   views, flowers, forest

    [Illustration: Trail map]

Bumpass Hell is the largest hydrothermal area in the park, and the trail
to it is one of the most scenic. Because of the popularity of this trail
it is usually opened around July 1, although occasionally the snow is
too deep and opening has to be postponed. The first mile is an open and
sparsely wooded mountainside with grand views of Lassen, Brokeoff,
Diller, and Diamond peaks, as well as the more distant Sierra.

The hydrothermal area can be seen from the summit of the trail. Dropping
into the area the trail passes by a number of hot springs, steam vents,
mud pots and boiling pools. A variety of trees and wildflowers are along
the trail, chiefly mountain hemlock and white-bark pine, silver leaf
lupine, red penstemon, bog kalmia and other flowers. Birds, too, are
abundant, and deer, marmots, and pikas may be encountered.

At the beginning of the trail is a box with self-guiding leaflets
describing the numbered points of interest on the trail. We urge you to
use them. You are warned to stay on the established trails as crusts are
thin over some hot areas.

    [Illustration: Lake Helen]


6. BUMPASS HELL TO COLD BOILING LAKE AND KINGS CREEK

  Starting Point:  Bumpass Hell parking area
  Distances:       4 miles one way
  Topography:      A rise of 500 feet in the first mile followed by a
                   descent of 1,000 feet
  Time:            5 hours, round trip
  Features:        Flowers, forest, scenic views, hydrothermal activity

    [Illustration: Trail map]

Following the trail from Bumpass Hell to the Kings Creek campground
furnishes an interesting variation from the usual round trip. Starting
at stake 23 on the Bumpass Hell self-guiding trail, it crosses the creek
and leaves the basin on the east side. It then goes downgrade for 1-1/2
miles to Cold Boiling Lake. Along this section of the trail are good
views of Mount Conard and Crumbaugh Lake, and the wildflower display,
especially lupine, is exceptionally good in the open places where seeps
provide moisture.

Cold gas bubbles are continuously coming from Cold Boiling Lake, hence
its name. From Cold Boiling Lake the trail is in the open, passing by
clumps of mountain hemlock and other trees.

By arranging for pick up at Kings Creek, this trail makes an ideal
downhill hike, and cuts the time in half.

    [Illustration: White-bark Pine]


7. LASSEN PEAK

  Starting Point:  Parking lot by Guide Marker 22
  Distances:       2.5 miles to top, round trip 5 miles
  Topography:      2,000 feet uphill on a steady and rather steep grade
                   (15%), starting at 8,500 feet elevation
  Time:            4-1/2 hours, round trip
  Features:        Scenic views, recent volcanic activity, timberline
                   trees

    [Illustration: Trail map]

Although persons of all ages have climbed Lassen Peak, it is not
recommended for children under 4, unless carried part way, nor for
adults past 70, unless in exceptionally good physical condition.
Experienced hikers will find it a comparatively easy hike. But many who
climb it are not experienced and may suffer mildly from being winded and
from tired muscles and feet. Many people do not allow enough time for
the trip. By starting slowly and resting often, most people should be
able to reach the summit and experience the thrill of being on "top of
the world".

The mountain Chickadee and Clark's nutcracker are commonly seen along
the trail. The gnarled mountain hemlocks and white-bark pines at
timberline, clinging tenaciously to the windswept slopes, are truly
picturesque. Views of distant peaks and lakes are magnificent. On the
very top, the skunkleaf polemonium blooms profusely in the short,
snow-free season.

Take water (snow won't really quench your thirst) and a sweater or
jacket along. If you walk through the craters on top of the peak, use
extreme caution. DO NOT SHORTCUT.

In the event a summer thunder storm develops, it is best to turn back.
Lightning strikes outstanding projections, and the top of Lassen Peak is
a favorite target. Never remain on any mountaintop during a thunder
storm.

Leaflets explaining the past geologic history as well as present natural
history of the peak are available to make your hike more enjoyable.

    [Illustration: Pilot Pinnacle]


8. TERRACE, SHADOW, AND CLIFF LAKES

  Starting Point:  Guide Marker 27
  Distances:       Terrace Lake, 0.5 mile; Shadow Lake, 0.8 mile; Cliff
                   Lake, 1.5 miles. Round trip 3 miles
  Topography:      Downhill, 300 feet to Terrace Lake, 350 to Shadow
                   Lake, and 650 to Cliff Lake, uphill on return
  Time:            Terrace Lake, 1 hour; Shadow Lake, 1-1/2 hours,
                   Cliff Lake, 3 hours, all round trip times
  Features:        Forests, lakes, flowers

    [Illustration: Trail map]

These three jewels lie in cirques under the north base of Reading Peak,
and are not difficult to reach. For the photographer they present plenty
of contrasting colors, for the naturalist a variety of trees, flowers,
birds, and animal life.

From the sign at the highway the trail descends rapidly. The trail forks
after 0.2 of a mile, the left fork going to Hat Lake and the right fork
to Terrace Lake. After Terrace Lake it passes along the shore of Shadow
Lake, and then through open woods and meadows for over a half mile to
the Cliff Lake junction. An animal trail goes towards Reading Peak
through a meadow and over a low moraine to Cliff Lake.

Because this trail starts at a high elevation and is largely on north
slopes it is not free from snow as early as many trails of the park.


9. PARK ROAD TO SUMMIT LAKE

  Starting Point:  Guide Marker 27
  Distances:       To road at guide marker 38, 3.7 miles; to Summit
                   Lake, 4.2 miles; both distances one way
  Topography:      Downhill, dropping 1,300 feet
  Time:            3 hours, one way
  Features:        Lakes, forest, flowers, scenic views

    [Illustration: Trail map]

The first part of this trail is #8, then it continues beyond the Cliff
Lake junction, down to the park road. There is a good variety of trees,
wildflowers, and birds. And for a feeling of being completely in the
wilderness, this trail is ideal, for a few yards off the road there are
no noises of civilization nor other reminders of the bustle of the
world.

Beyond the Cliff Lake turnoff the trail descends quite rapidly through
the Open forest, which becomes more dense as it approaches the lower
loop of the road. Lupines, both yellow and blue, are the predominant
flowers along the trail. At higher elevations the mountain hemlocks are
most common, but give way to red firs, white pines, and ponderosa pines
as the trail descends.

By arranging for transportation at guide marker 38 where the trail
crosses the road, one can have an easy hike of about 3 hours. The return
hike uphill will take about twice as long as coming down.


10. PARK ROAD TO HAT LAKE

  Starting Point:  Guide Marker 27
  Distances:       2.8 miles, one way
  Topography:      Downhill, 1,600 feet, descending rapidly in places
  Time:            2-1/2 hours, one way
  Features:        Flowers, forests, scenic views, stream

    [Illustration: Trail map]

Starting where Trails No. 8 and 9 start, 0.2 mile from the road the left
trail fork is followed, and the trail passes through forests and other
natural features similar to No. 8 and 9. A number of good views of
Lassen Peak can be seen along the way. For wildflowers it is one of the
best in the park for variety, with lupine, scarlet gilia, red and blue
penstemon, monkshood, columbine, and many others.

After separating from the Terrace Lake trail it goes through open
forests, then descends rapidly before crossing the east fork of Hat
Creek. Just past this crossing the Paradise Meadows trail turns to the
right (south) while the Hat Creek trail turns to the left. The short
trip to Paradise Meadows is well worth the time, for here you can find
one of the outstanding wildflower displays of the park. The Hat Creek
trail descends through the forests to the Devastated Area and Hat Lake,
reaching the park road at guide marker 42. By arranging transportation
at Hat Lake, the hike is an easy one, taking about 2-1/2 hours. The
round trip will require 6 or 7 hours.


11. COLD BOILING AND CRUMBAUGH LAKES, CONARD MEADOWS, MILL CREEK FALLS,
AND SULPHUR WORKS CAMPGROUND

  Starting Point:  Kings Creek Campground
  Distances:       Cold Boiling Lake, 0.8 mile; Crumbaugh Lake, 1.3;
                   Conard Meadows, 2.2; Mill Creek Falls, 3; Sulphur
                   Works Campground 5.3; all distances one way
  Topography:      Downhill 800 feet to campground
  Time:            Cold Boiling Lake, 3/4 hour; Crumbaugh Lake 1-1/2
                   hours; Conard Meadows, 2 hours; Sulphur Works
                   Campground, 4 hours. For round trips times should be
                   at least doubled
  Features:        Forests, flowers, waterfalls, lakes, scenic views,
                   streams

    [Illustration: Trail map]

This little-traveled area is excellent for birds, wildflowers, and deer.
Cold Boiling Lake is so named because gas bubbles are continually rising
at some points near the shore. The meadow by Crumbaugh Lake has a
variety of wildflowers and Conard Meadows is ideal for wildlife. There
are no fish in either lake, as they will not live when introduced.

The trail is fairly level to Cold Boiling Lake, and then descends to
Crumbaugh Lake. It is level to Conard Meadows, and from there to Mill
Creek Falls descends by a steep grade (see Mill Creek Falls trail). A
one-way trip to the Sulphur Works campground, arranging for
transportation at the lower end, makes an ideal, easy, half-day hike.


12. KINGS CREEK FALLS

  Starting Point:  Guide Marker 32
  Distances:       3 miles round trip
  Topography:      Descent of 700 feet
  Time:            2-1/2 hours
  Features:        Waterfalls, cascades, forest, flowers

    [Illustration: Trail map]

About half a mile down, the trail splits. It is recommended that the
left trail be followed downhill, where it rejoins the other section. The
right fork follows the cascades, and is much easier to climb on the
return trip. The trail goes down through pine and fir forests, and over
a meadow where flowers bloom all summer. Here one can find the leopard
lily, grass-of-parnassus, and many others. Watch for glacial polishing
on the rocks along the way.

Morning is the best time to photograph the falls, as later in the day
(after 2:00 p.m.) they are in shadow. The height of the falls is about
30 feet.

Follow the beautiful cascades (left) on the return trip. Watch for
mountainash, as this is one of the few places one can see this small,
shrublike tree that produces clumps of brilliant red berries in late
August and September.

Below the falls the trail continues downhill to Drakesbad, another 2.5
miles.


13. SUMMIT LAKE TO ECHO AND TWIN LAKES

  Starting Point:  East side of Summit Lake, from the trail that
                   encircles the lake
  Distances:       Echo lake, 2 miles; Upper Twin, 3-1/2 miles; Lower
                   Twin, 4 miles, one way
  Topography:      Uphill 500 feet in the first mile, descending 500
                   feet to Lower Twin Lake
  Time:            Echo Lake, 1-1/2 hours; Upper Twin, 2-1/2 hours;
                   Lower Twin, 3 hours, all one way. Double these times
                   for round trips
  Features:        Lakes, forests, flowers

    [Illustration: Trail map]

This is a good nature trail, as many kinds of wildflowers, trees, and
birds are found. Deer are common in the area. Swimming is good in late
summer. This is also a favorite trail for overnight hikers as it leads
to the wilderness area of the eastern part of the park.

Hardy hikers may wish to go beyond Twin Lakes. The trail continues past
Rainbow Lake to Snag Lake, 3.5 miles, and another trail goes to Butte
Lake, 5.5 miles.


    [Illustration: LASSEN VOLCANIC NATIONAL PARK]


14. SUMMIT LAKE TO HORSESHOE LAKE VIA UPPER TWIN LAKE

  Starting Point:  East side of Summit Lake
  Distances:       8 miles, one way
  Topography:      Two ridges to cross, 500 feet and 300 feet
  Time:            6 hours one way. For round trip, it will take
                   approximately twice the time
  Features:        Lakes, forest, flowers, wildlife

    [Illustration: Trail map]

This is one of the two main trails to the east part of the park.
Horseshoe Lake can also be reached by a dirt road from Chester. If
transportation can be arranged this trail will make a comparatively easy
day's hike. There is a campground at Horseshoe Lake, so it can make a
good objective for an overnight hike. Hardy hikers can make the round
trip in one day.

The first part of the trip is most of No. 13, and from Upper Twin Lake
the trail goes south and passes close to the base of Crater Butte. Part
of the trip is in open meadows and part through fir-pine forest.

An interesting variation for a round trip is to return via Grassy Swale
Creek. (See No. 15, Summit Lake to Horseshoe Lake via Grassy Swale
Creek.)

    [Illustration: Mountain lake]


15. SUMMIT LAKE TO HORSESHOE LAKE VIA GRASSY SWALE CREEK

  Starting Point:  South end of Summit Lake campground
  Distances:       8 miles, one way
  Topography:      Downgrade 700 feet during first 3 miles, then
                   gradually upgrade 500 feet
  Time:            6 hours, one way. Double the time for round trip
  Features:        Flowers, forest, lakes, wildlife, streams

    [Illustration: Trail map]

Grassy Swale Creek passes through some beautiful meadows in which are
found a variety of wildflowers. Sundew, a rare, insect-eating plant, may
be found near the trail in the wet section of the meadow about one mile
northeast of Corral Meadow. Douglas spirea also makes a colorful display
here.

The trail descends along Summit Creek about 3 miles to Corral Meadow.
Here it leaves the Drakesbad trail, crosses Kings Creek and follows
along Grassy Swale Creek to the base of Crater Butte. It then follows on
to Horseshoe Lake. It may be quite wet in places until late summer.
Mosquito repellent may be needed.

This is an excellent trail for naturalists as many species of trees,
flowers, birds, and mammals can be observed.


16. CLUSTER LAKES

  Starting Point:  Locked gate at Budget Flat. Badger Flat is 6 miles
                   down the dirt road which leaves the Park Road at
                   Guide Marker 41
  Distances:       First Cluster Lake, 2 miles; second, 2.5; Silver
                   Lake, 3; Big Bear Lake, 4, one way
  Topography:      Uphill 200 feet on a gradual grade
  Time:            Round trips: 2-1/2, 3, 4 and 5 hours respectively
  Features:        Lakes, forest, flowers

    [Illustration: Trail map]

This group of six lakes is easily reached by the trail from Badger Flat.

Mule-ears (wyethia) puts on a magnificent display in Badger Flats, and
falsehellebore is prevalent in places. Spreading phlox is especially
attractive in late June and early July along the beginning of the trail,
and paintbrush further up, along with Newberry penstemon or
pride-of-the-mountains.

The trail passes through open forested areas in a relatively level
section of Lassen. After passing the second lake the trail forks. The
left trail goes to Silver Lake. The trail continues over rather level
terrain past Feather Lake to Lower Twin Lake, another 2 miles.

From Big Bear Lake the trail continues 3.5 miles to Summit Lake,
crossing two ridges on the way.


17. PARADISE MEADOWS

  Starting Point:  Hat lake parking area, Guide Marker 42
  Distances:       1.5 miles, one way
  Topography:      Uphill, 600 feet
  Time:            2 hours, one way, 3 hours for round trip
  Features:        Flowers, forest, stream

    [Illustration: Trail map]

For wildflowers during midsummer Paradise Meadows is one of the best
areas in the park. Elephanthead and gentian can be seen near Hat Lake;
scarlet gilia along the first mile; and columbine, lupine, monkshood,
penstemon (both red and blue), falsehellebore, and many other species
will be found in the meadow area. Also, it is a good area to see birds
and deer.

For about a mile the trail goes up rather steeply. At the meadows there
are good views of Lassen and Reading peaks, and the cirque in which the
meadows lie.

Upon reaching lower Paradise Meadows a trail turns to the right. This
goes to the Park Road near Terrace Lake. (See Park Road to Hat Lake
trail.)

    [Illustration: Mertens Cassiope]


18. CHAOS CRAGS AND CRAGS LAKE

  Starting Point:  The trail leaves the Manzanita Lake Camp road about
                   100 yards south of the store and near the creek
                   crossing
  Distances:       1.8 miles, one way
  Topography:      Uphill about 700 feet
  Time:            3 hours, round trip
  Features:        Forest, flowers, recent volcanic activity, dwarfed
                   trees

    [Illustration: Trail map]

Chaos Crags were formed by lava being forced upward and hardening in
place, similar to squeezing toothpaste out of a tube. Considerable
volcanic activity took place in the crater at the north base of the
Crags. As a result of this activity a huge landslide occurred, strewing
rocks over 2-1/2 square miles, including the area around Manzanita and
Reflection lakes. This rock slide is called Chaos Jumbles.

The trail follows through pine-fir forests close to the edge of the
Jumbles. Many saprophytes can be seen along the trail, together with
pipsissewa and pyrolas.

The crater at the base of the Crags is filled with snow early in the
season, later melting to form a small lake which may dry up toward the
end of the summer.

The trees in the Jumbles are small, but in spite of their size, many are
over 250 years old. From the age of the oldest trees it is estimated
that the eruption and landslide occurred about 1690.


19. LILY POND

  Starting Point:  Across the Park Road from the Manzanita Lake Visitor
                   Center
  Distances:       1 mile
  Topography:      Level
  Time:            1 hour
  Features:        Trees, flowers, shrubs, ponds, recent volcanic
                   activity

    [Illustration: Trail map]

This trail is maintained by the National Park Service primarily as a
nature trail. Leaflets are available describing 43 numbered points of
interest, many of which are trees, shrubs, and flowers. Ten of the 12
species of coniferous trees found in the park are along this trail. In
the pond itself are aquatic plants and amphibians. The willows and
alders nearby are shelters for several species of birds. Deer are
frequently seen in the area, as well as ground squirrels and other small
mammals. In the early summer the brilliant snowplant is quite common
along the trail.

This is an excellent trail for a person to become acquainted with the
flora and fauna of Lassen Volcanic National Park. Leaflets may be
purchased at the trail head describing 43 points of interest.


20. MANZANITA LAKE

  Starting Point:  Any place along the lake
  Distances:       1.7 miles around the lake
  Topography:      Level
  Time:            1-1/2 hours
  Features:        Lake, flowers, wildlife, trees, shrubs, scenic views

    [Illustration: Trail map]

On the south side of the lake the trail goes through manzanita brush and
open meadows. Along the west side is ponderosa pine forest with alder
thickets by the lake. Along this stretch can be seen some of the few
black cottonwood trees found in the park. On the north side is the road,
with willow and alder thickets by the shore, and on the east side is the
lodge and campground. From the west side are excellent views of Lassen
Peak and Chaos Crags. A good variety of birds may be observed, including
ducks, geese, coots, grebes, warblers, finches, swallows, blackbirds,
sapsuckers, and nighthawks. Deer are frequently seen in the manzanita.
An easy, pleasant walk.


21. MANZANITA CREEK

  Starting Point:  South end of Manzanita lake Campground
  Distances:       3.5 miles to upper meadows, one way
  Topography:      Uphill, 1,250 feet
  Time:            5 hours for the round trip
  Features:        Forest, flowers, scenic views, stream

    [Illustration: Trail map]

This hike starts on a fire road that provides steady, but relatively
easy climbing. The first 0.7 mile is through manzanita, and birds and
smaller mammals can be observed. When the forest of red fir and
lodgepole pine is reached the trail becomes much more appealing, and
striking views of Chaos Crags and Lassen Peak are glimpsed through the
trees.

On the last half mile, where the creek winds and tumbles through sloping
meadows, the wildflower display is magnificent. Flowers bloom profusely
through July and August. Walk through the upper meadows to see the
Lassen paintbrush (found only in this park), the pink Lewis
monkeyflower, the brilliant fireweed, both the blue and the white
monkshood, and many others. Camera, binoculars, and lunch are all
advisable for this trip.


22. CINDER CONE

  Starting Point:  West end of Butte Lake Campground
  Distances:       2 miles to the summit, one way. A trail continues
                   down the south side for a round trip of 5 miles.
  Topography:      800 feet climbing cone
  Time:            3 hours to the cone summit and back, 4 hours if
                   trail down south slope is followed back to Butte
                   Lake Campground
  Features:        Forest, recent volcanic activity, history, views

    [Illustration: Trail map]

This is one of the most perfectly formed cinder cones in the United
States, and one of the most recent. In the spring of 1851, pioneers
following Emigrant, or Nobles, Trail saw the results of the previous
winter's eruption.

For persons interested in geology or photography this trail is a must.
It goes through open forest for about 1.5 miles, close to the base of
the cone, and the rest of the trail is in the open. The trail up the
cone is fairly steep, and is in loose Cinders, making climbing similar
to what it would be in loose sand. The climb is not difficult if made
with frequent rest stops. High shoes or boots are advisable.

The Cinder Cone Summit commands excellent views of Lassen, Prospect,
Harkness, and other mountains, of Butte and Snag Lakes, and of the
Fantastic Lava Beds and Painted Dunes. A trail completely encircles the
double crater, and a spur goes down into the crater. Another trail
continues down the south side of the cone and encircles it, adding
another mile for a 5 mile round trip. It passes near the 1851 vent from
which lava flowed. This is now a small ice grotto.

Self-guiding leaflets which describe 44 numbered points of interest may
be purchased at the Ranger Station.

    [Illustration: Mountain Hemlock Cones]


23. PROSPECT PEAK

  Starting Point:  Cinder Cone Trail Marker 13
  Distances:       3.5 miles to the summit
  Topography:      2,200 feet of climbing
  Time:            5 hours for the round trip of 7 miles
  Features:        Scenic views, forest

    [Illustration: Trail map]

Prospect Peak provides commanding views of Lassen, Harkness, West
Prospect, Shasta, and other surrounding mountains, several lakes, and
the crater of the Cinder Cone. In the early summer there is a small lake
in the crater of Prospect Peak, an ancient volcano.

About a half mile from Butte Lake the trail leaves the Cinder Cone
trail, and climbs steadily through ponderosa pine, fir, and sub-alpine
forests to above timberline. Birds and other wildlife abound, and
occasionally, bobcats or even a mountain lion may be seen.

During June and early July there is snow in the crater. No drinking
water is available.


24. BATHTUB LAKE

  Starting Point:  Butte Lake Parking Lot
  Distances:       0.4 mile, one way
  Topography:      70 foot climb at start
  Time:            1 hour for the round trip
  Features:        Lakes, forest, flowers

    [Illustration: Trail map]

This is a delightful, easy walk through open ponderosa pine and fir
forest to two small lakes. The first lake is a quarter mile and the
second (Bathtub) a half mile from the camp. For good (not icy) swimming
these lakes are recommended. And for a leisurely nature walk one can
easily spend two hours looking for birds and flowers and identifying
trees and shrubs.


25. BUTTE LAKE (North and East Shores)

  Starting Point:  Butte Lake Parking Lot
  Distances:       2 miles to the south end of the lake
  Topography:      Uphill 150 feet and down along the north shore, then
                   quite level
  Time:            3 hours for the round trip
  Features:        Forest, scenic views, flowers, lake

    [Illustration: Trail map]

For sheer beauty and a feeling of wilderness, this is an excellent
trail. Good views of the lake and the Cinder Cone are frequent. Deer and
a variety of birds, trees, and flowers may be observed.

In the first mile the trail ascends a hill overlooking the lake. After
crossing Butte Creek it follows close to the shore to the south end.

From the south end of the lake the trail continues 2.5 miles to Snag
Lake and another 3 miles to either Juniper or Horseshoe lakes. (See
Trail No. 27, Butte Lake to Snag Lake; No. 28, Horseshoe Lake to Snag
Lake; and No. 29, Juniper Lake to Snag Lake.)


26. WIDOW LAKE

  Starting Point:  Butte Lake Parking Lot
  Distances:       4 miles, one way
  Topography:      Climb of 1,000 feet
  Time:            5-1/2 hours for the round trip
  Features:        Lake, forest, scenic views

    [Illustration: Trail map]

The first 2 miles is trail No. 25, Butte Lake. From the Widow Lake trail
are scenic views of Cinder Cone, Lassen Peak, Prospect Peak, Mount
Harkness, and many other mountains of the vicinity. From the south end
of Butte Lake the trail climbs rapidly, about 1,000 feet in 2 miles.

From Widow Lake the trail continues south, past the Red Cinder Cone to
Jakey Lake (6 miles), and on to Juniper Lake (10 miles).


27. BUTTE LAKE TO SNAG LAKE

  Starting Point:  Butte Lake Parking Lot
  Distances:       6.5 miles to south end of Snag Lake, one way
  Topography:      Rise of 100 feet
  Time:            5 hours round trip to north end of Snag Lake, 8
                   hours round trip to south end of Snag Lake
  Features:        Lakes, recent volcanic activity, forest, flowers

    [Illustration: Trail map]

The first 2 miles is Trail No. 25, Butte Lake. From the south end of
Butte Lake there are two trails. One, not maintained by the Park
Service, goes by the base of the lava flow, and the other goes through
the forest to Snag Lake. Along the lava flow one can easily picture the
volcanic activity as the trail winds close to huge basalt blocks.

The two trails come together at the bay on the east shore and one trail
continues to the south end of the lake. From this point a trail leads to
Juniper Lake, another to Horseshoe Lake, and another around Snag Lake
and back to Butte Lake via the Cinder Cone. The total distances from
Butte Lake are: to Juniper or Horseshoe lakes, 10 miles; and around Snag
Lake and the Cinder Cone back to Butte Lake, 13 miles.


28. HORSESHOE LAKE TO SNAG LAKE

  Starting Point:  Horseshoe Lake Ranger Station
  Distances:       3 miles, one way, to southern end of Snag lake
  Topography:      Descent of 600 feet
  Time:            3-1/2 hours, round trip
  Features:        Lakes, stream, flowers, forest, history

    [Illustration: Trail map]

In the meadow northeast of the Horseshoe Lake Ranger Station the remains
of an early settler's cabin can be seen, and many wildflowers and birds.
The trail follows Grassy Creek much of the way to Snag Lake.

Snag Lake was created by lava flows from Cinder Cone damming Grassy
Creek. The trees that were killed slowly rotted and fell into the lake,
but in the early days of the park there were many standing snags to be
seen. Since the lake seeps through lava, the level varies considerably
from year to year and season to season, depending on the rains.

Trails follow both the east and west sides of Snag Lake, continuing to
Butte Lake. (See Trail No. 27.)


29. JUNIPER LAKE TO SNAG LAKE

  Starting Point:  Juniper Lake Ranger Station
  Distances:       3 miles, one way, to southern end of Snag Lake
  Topography:      Climb 240 feet in first half mile, followed by a
                   descent of 1,000 feet
  Time:            4-1/2 hours, round trip
  Features:        Lakes, stream, flowers, forest, history

    [Illustration: Trail map]

Wildflowers bloom profusely in Cameron Meadows during July and often
into August, and it is a good area for birds and deer. Here, also, are
the remains of an early settler's cabin.

The trail is shaded by ponderosa pine and fir forest most of the way,
except for a short stretch at Cameron Meadows. From here it swings close
to the east fork of Grassy Creek and continues on to Snag Lake.

From Snag Lake Trail No. 27 continues on to Butte Lake.

    [Illustration: Jeffrey Pine]


30. INSPIRATION POINT

  Starting Point:  Juniper Lake Ranger Station
  Distances:       0.8 mile to the overlook
  Topography:      Climb of 400 feet
  Time:            2-1/2 hours for the round trip
  Features:        Scenic views, forest

    [Illustration: Trail map]

Inspiration Point is well named, as it affords some of the finest views
of Lassen, Harkness, Prospect, and more distant mountains. Snag, Butte,
and Juniper lakes are in full view, as well as Cameron Meadows and
Cinder Cone. To the southeast of the trail, as you approach Inspiration
Point, look for the fine specimens of western juniper. The trail climbs
steadily through western white pine and red fir timber to the open area
of the point. Various birds may be seen as well as deer and small
mammals.


31. CRYSTAL LAKE

  Starting Point:  From along the road on the east side of Juniper Lake
                   about a mile from the ranger station
  Distances:       0.4 mile, one way
  Topography:      Climb of 450 feet
  Time:            1 hour, round trip
  Features:        Lake, scenic views, forest

    [Illustration: Trail map]

This lake lies in a cirque below the Crystal Cliffs. From the trail are
views of Juniper Lake, Lassen and other peaks. Many consider it the most
beautiful lake in Lassen. A relatively easy hike through forests and
meadows surrounding the lake.


32. MOUNT HARKNESS

  Starting Point:  Juniper Lake near campground at the southeast end
  Distances:       2 miles to the summit of Mount Harkness
  Topography:      1,300-foot climb
  Time:            4 hours for the round trip
  Features:        Forest, scenic views

    [Illustration: Trail map]

The trail winds upward through the pine-fir forest. On top of Mount
Harkness is the only fire lookout station in the park. From it are
outstanding views of Juniper Lake and Lassen, Brokeoff, Prospect, and
other peaks in the park, as well as the Sierra to the south and other
mountains to the east and north. On top, the brilliant red bloom of the
smooth cycladenia brightens the rocky slopes during July.

The lookout is staffed during the summer months and usually these people
are glad to have visitors provided water or food are not requested. All
of their supplies must be packed to the mountain top.

By proceeding down the west side of Mount Harkness, then turning
northeast along the shores of Juniper Lake, an interesting all-day hike
can be had. The round trip will require about 6 hours and involve about
5-1/2 miles of hiking.

    [Illustration: Trail map]


33. BOILING SPRINGS LAKE

  Starting Point:  Drakesbad Lodge
  Distances:       1 mile to the lake, 2 miles round trip
  Topography:      Easy 200-foot climb
  Time:            2 hours for the round trip
  Features:        Flowers, forest, hydrothermal activity

    [Illustration: Trail map]

A number of steam vents are located under Boiling Springs Lake, keeping
the temperature of the lake around 125 degrees. The mudpots on the
southeast shore are among the best in the park. Their coloring is
magnificent.

The trail crosses a meadow and then goes through forest to the lake and
around it. Trees include incense-cedar, ponderosa pine, Douglas-fir,
white fir, sugar pine, and others. A variety of wildflowers are found,
and it is a good area to observe birds.

At the beginning of the trail hikers can pick up a leaflet describing 44
points of interest. These refer to trees, shrubs, flowers, geology, and
other nature subjects. This is a relatively easy walk and one can
profitably spend half a day using the leaflet.


34. DEVIL'S KITCHEN

  Starting Point:  Drakesbad Lodge
  Distances:       1.5 miles one way
  Topography:      Gradually uphill 300 feet
  Time:            2-1/2 hours for the round trip
  Features:        Flowers, forest, hydrothermal activity

    [Illustration: Trail map]

This hydrothermal area is larger than the Sulphur Works, smaller than
Bumpass Hell, and differs from both. Hot Springs Creek runs through the
area, and on a shelf just above this creek are a number of mudpots.
Whoever named this area apparently imagined the devil cooking over these
pots. The area extends above and beyond the mudpots with a number of
steam vents on the side of the hill. And at the lower end are a group of
trees which were killed quite recently when new vents opened up. In
exploring the hot springs area, hikers should be extremely careful as
crusts may be thin and trails thru the area have not been established.

The trail to Devil's Kitchen crosses a meadow near Drakesbad (where one
should look for wildflowers) and enters the forest. Just beyond the
meadow are some dead snags where marmots are frequently seen. Further
along, just below the trail and in the creek are some beaver dams.

This is an excellent trail for those interested in biology and geology.




                  Trails not described in the booklet:


  Kings Creek to Drakesbad, 5 miles, downhill
  Around Butte and Snag lakes via Cinder Cone, 13 miles
  Butte Lake to Rainbow and Twin lakes, 7 miles
  Summit Lake to Rainbow and Snag Lakes, 6 and 8 miles
  Juniper Lake to Jakey Lake, 3 miles
  Juniper Lake to Jakey, Widow, and Butte lakes, 12 miles
  Around Juniper Lake, 5-1/2 miles
  Drakesbad to Drake Lake, 1-1/2 miles
  Kings Creek to Twin Meadows, 2-1/2 miles

These trails are shown on the topographic map of Lassen Volcanic
National Park.

Experienced hikers may want to visit places not on the trails, and with
a topographic map as a guide should be able to go to a number of places
in comparative safety. But beginners should stick to the established
trails. Before venturing off the trails one should consult with a park
ranger.




                                 INDEX


                                        Trail No.         Page No.

  Bathtub Lake                                 24               43
  Boiling Springs Lake                         33               54
  Brokeoff Mountain                             1               10
  Bumpass Hell                               5, 6           16, 18
  Butte Lake                               25, 27           44, 46
  Cinder Cone                                  22               40
  Chaos Crags                                  18               36
  Cliff Lake                                    8               22
  Cluster Lakes                                16               33
  Cold Boiling Lake                         6, 11           18, 25
  Conard Meadows                               11               25
  Crags Lake                                   18               36
  Crumbaugh Lake                               11               25
  Crystal Lake                                 31               51
  Devil's Kitchen                              34               55
  Echo Lake                                    13               27
  Forest Lake                                   1               10
  Grassy Swale Creek                           15               32
  Hat Lake                                 10, 17           24, 34
  Horseshoe Lake                       14, 15, 28       30, 32, 47
  Inspiration Point                            30               50
  Juniper Lake                                 29               48
  Kings Creek Falls                            12               26
  Lassen Peak                                   7               20
  Lily Pond                                    19               37
  Manzanita Lake                               20               38
  Mill Creek Falls                          2, 11           12, 25
  Mount Harkness                               32               52
  Paradise Meadows                         10, 17           24, 34
  Prospect Peak                                23               42
  Ridge Lakes                                   3               13
  Shadow Lake                                   8               22
  Snag Lake                            27, 28, 29       46, 47, 48
  Summit Lake                       9, 13, 14, 15   23, 27, 30, 32
  Sulphur Works Hot Springs                     4               14
  Terrace Lake                                  8               22
  Twin Lakes                               13, 14           27, 30
  Widow Lake                                   26               45




                          Transcriber's Notes


--Silently corrected a few typos.

--Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

--In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.







End of Project Gutenberg's Lassen Trails, by Stephen Halsey Matteson

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LASSEN TRAILS ***

***** This file should be named 55799.txt or 55799.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/5/7/9/55799/

Produced by Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

